# Key file types in genomic epidemiology sequencing workflow
(Below is for Illumina sequencing. Nanopore sequencing is slightly different)

<br>

| Data analysis | step 1 | step 2 | step 3 | step 4 | 
|---|-----|------|-------|--|
| File content | raw sequencing reads | reads mapped to reference genome* | sample genome | tree |
| File type | FASTQ file | BAM file | FASTA file | JSON file |

\* The reference genome is the original COVID genome sequence from Wuhan.

<br>

## Read file: `sample.fastq` or `sample.fq`

- The raw file generated by the sequencer is usually in FASTQ format. 

- FASTQ file stores sequencing reads.

- Below is 1 read in the FASTQ file. 
```
@A00111:640:HVVF3DRXX:1:2101:30038:1063 1:N:0:CTCTGATTGCCT+TTGGTCTGCCGA
CTATCATTAACTGAATCCATAGGTTAATGAGGCGAACCGGGGGAACTGAAACATCTAAGTACCCCGAGGAAAAGAAATCAACCGAGATTCCCCCAGTAGCGGCGA
+
FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF:FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF:FFF:FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF:FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF:FFFFFFFF
```
-  
   + Row 1: read name starting with @ and followed by arbituary info based on sequencer and users.
   + Row 2: actual nucleotide sequence of the read
   + Row 3: usually a + sign
   + Row 4: quality (aka confidence) of each base in ASCII. It has to be the same length as row 2.

- So each read is represented by 4 rows. If one FASTQ file contains 1000 reads, it will have 4 x 1000 = 4000 rows.

- If the sequencing is done in single-end mode, it will generate 1 FASTQ file for each sample. If it is done in paired-end mode, it will generate 2 FASTQ files for each sample, usually named as `sample_R1.fastq` and `sample_R2.fastq`.

- Example FASTQ [R1](https://github.com/czbiohub/sc2-illumina-pipeline/raw/master/test_data/sample1_artic_R1.fq.gz) and [R2](https://github.com/czbiohub/sc2-illumina-pipeline/raw/master/test_data/sample1_artic_R2.fq.gz)

- A real [example from SRA](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?run=SRR13690103), the NIH repository for sequencing read data. See the `Data-access` tab,  `Original Format` section. 

<br>

## Mapped read file: `sample.bam` or `sample.sam`

- To characterize an individual genome, i.e. to identify the mutations, we need to compare the sequencing reads originated from the sample genome to the reference genome.

- Such a comparison results in a [BAM file](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/SAMv1.pdf) that contains comprehensive information about how each sequencing read matches or differs from the reference genome. 

- BAM files are binary to reduce file size, so they require special tools to open and read. The non-binary, human readable version of BAM files are SAM files but they are much larger in size.

- BAM files are an essential intermediate step in the workflow, but they are usually not directly used in genomic epidemiology investigations.

- A more concise [VCF file](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.2.pdf) that only contains the information about mutations can further be generated from BAM files. 

<br>

## Consensus genome: `sample.fasta` or `sample.fa`

- Knowing a reference genome and how the sample genome differs from it (information stored in a BAM file), one can re-constitute the full sample genome that was sequenced. 

- The resulting genomic sequence is stored in FASTA files.

- A FASTA file stores nucleotide sequences or amino acid sequences.

- Below is an example FASTA file with 2 very small hypothetical genomes (COVID genomes are 30,000 bases long which will take some scrolling):

```
>sample1_name
NNNNNNNNNCTTGTAGATCTGTTCTCTAAACGAACTTTAAAATCTGTGTGGCTGTCACTC
GGCTGCATGCTTAGTGCACTCACGCAGTATAATTAATAAC

>sample2_name
NNNNNNNNNCTCTTGTAGATCTGTTCTCTAAACGAACTTTAAAATCTGTGTGGCTGTCAC
TCGGCTGCATGCTTAGTGCACTCACGCAGTATAATTAATA
```
-
  + Each sequence starts with `>` followed by the name of the sequence.
  + Nucleotide positions can have [more than 1 nucleotide composition](https://genome.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/help/iupac.html.). For example the beginning of example genomes are filled with N, which means they can be any nucleotide, due to low confidence in what these bases should be. 

- FASTA is the file people submit to GISAID or NCBI GenBank. 

- [Here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/MN908947.3?report=fasta) is the FASTA for one of the reference COVID genomes.

<br>

## Phylogeny tree: `all_samples.json`

- With genomes of multiple samples, one can build a phylogeny tree based on the similarity and differences in their genomes. 

- There are many file types used to store phylogeny trees. Nextstrain uses a specialized JSON format. These JSON files contain both the structure of the tree and a lot of useful metadata. 

- [Here](https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/augur/en/stable/index.html) is what Nextstrain does with the genomes. In short, the Augur pipeline processes genome data, builds phylogeny trees, and write its output in JSON files, which is then the input for Auspice to display the phylogeny tree. 

- A [very simple JSON](https://github.com/czbiohub/covidtracker/raw/master/auspice/covidtracker_pawnee-examples.json) that one can drag and drop to https://auspice.us/

- [Example Nextstrain JSON](https://github.com/nextstrain/augur/blob/master/augur/data/schema-export-v2.json).

